Tutorial
========

This is a simple guide to get started.

.. code:: python

    >>> from pendsim import sim, controller, viz
    >>> import numpy as np
    >>> import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

We import the simulation logic from ``pendsim.sim``, any built-in
controllers as well as the controller base class from
``pendsim.controller``, and the visualizations are stored in
``pendsim.viz``.

.. code:: python

    >>> dt, t_final = 0.01, 5.0
    >>> pend = sim.Pendulum(
    >>>     2.0,  # Large mass, 2.0 kg
    >>>     1.0,  # Small mass, 1.0 kg
    >>>     2.0,  # length of arm, 2.0 meter
    >>>     initial_state=np.array([0.0, 0.0, 0.1, 0.0]),
    >>> )

Every simulation begins at t=0 and runs for some period of time,
measured in seconds. Each simulation has a timestep, usually denoted
``dt``,which tells us how often the controller’s ``policy`` is
implemented.

A pendulum is created by instantiating a new ``Pendulum`` class. This
class takes three arguments, M, m, and l. So here, we have created a
cart with mass 2kg, a pendulum with mass 1kg, and an arm length 2 m. We
also pass in an optional ``initial_state`` which sets
``[x=0, xdot=0, theta=0.1, thetadot=0]``. So, we start off slightly
tipped over.

.. code:: python

    >>> cont = controller.NoController()

We just set the controller to be a basic controller. It will read the
state and will do nothing every timestep. We need to provide a
controller every time we run the simulation, even if it does nothing
like this one.

.. code:: python

    >>> simu = sim.Simulation(dt, t_final, lambda t: 0)

We create a simulation, with timestep ``dt``, final time ``t_final``,
and an external force function of ``lambda t: 0``, which basically just
returns 0 external force for every time value ``t``.

.. code:: python

    >>> results = simu.simulate(pend, cont)
    100%|█████████████████████████████████████████████████████| 500/500 [00:00<00:00, 2456.95it/s]


Calling ``simulate`` on the simulation object actually runs the
simulation. ``simulate`` takes 2 arguments, a pendulum object and a
controller object. The results of the simulation are stored into a
dataframe, results.

.. code:: python

    >>> print(results.columns)

    MultiIndex([(         'state',              'x'),
                (         'state',             'xd'),
                (         'state',              't'),
                (         'state',             'td'),
                (        'energy',        'kinetic'),
                (        'energy',      'potential'),
                (        'energy',          'total'),
                (        'forces',         'forces'),
                ('control action', 'control action'),
                (         'state',            'xdd'),
                (         'state',            'tdd'),
                (        'forces',            'pRx'),
                (        'forces',            'pRy'),
                (        'forces',             'pG'),
                (        'forces',            'cRy'),
                (        'forces',            'cRx'),
                (        'forces',             'cG'),
                (        'forces',             'cN')],
               )


So let’s see what data we got back. Because there are 4 different
states, we have a multi-index with two levels. This allows us to group
quantities together to more easily slice and dice the results we get.
Often, we see ``x``, ``xd``, ``t``, ``td`` grouped together as
subquantities, because they are our state vectors.

.. code:: python

    >>> fig, ax = plt.subplots(nrows=4, sharex=True)
    >>> state_labels = ["x", "xd", "t", "td"]
    >>> for i, s in enumerate(state_labels):
    >>>     ax[i].plot(results[("state", s)], label="state")
    >>>     ax[i].set_title(s)

.. image:: _static/state_plot.png

We can see some results of the simulation. It looks like our positive
initial :math:`\theta` value caused the pendulum to tip over and just
about swing completely back up.

.. code:: python

    visu = viz.Visualizer(results, pend, speed=1)

We can confirm this by creating a vizualizer using the ``Visualizer``
class. We instantiate it with the same ``pend`` object, and the results
from our simulation.

.. code:: python

    ani = visu.animate()

Calling this function will bring up the animation. How you
are running this package (notebook, natively, and some platform-specifics)
will influence how the video is eventually displayed.

.. raw:: html

    <video width="800" height="450" controls>
    <source src="_static/no_control.mp4" type="video/mp4">
    Your browser does not support the video tag.
    </video>


We can animate the figure by calling the ``Visualizer``\ ’s ``animate``
function. Importantly, we must bind the result of that function to a
variable, ``ani``, because the animation plays as long as that variable
exists. If we just call ``visu.animate()`` without storing the result in
a varialbe, the animation will only exist long enough to be created and
then immediately destroyed.

So, just bind your animations to variables.

In order to display properly in notebooks, it sometimes may be
necessarily to convert the generated animation to an HTML5 video:

.. code:: python

    from IPython.display import HTML
    HTML(ani.to_html5_video())
